<chapter id="h2-basics"
><title
>Raamatuntutkimisen perusasiat</title>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-purpose">
<title
>Tarkoituksemme kuinka lähestymme Raamattua</title>
<para>
<blockquote
><attribution
>Jn.5:39-40</attribution
> <para
>You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is these that bear witness of Me; and you are unwilling to come to Me, that you may have life.</para>
</blockquote
> 
</para>

<para
>Kirjan päätarkoitus on tuoda meille Martti Lutherin sanat <quote
>Menemme kehdon luo vauvan takia</quote
>; juuri kuten Raamatun tutkimisessa, emme tee sitä sen itsensä takia mutta Jumalan työtoveruuden tähden. </para>

<blockquote
><attribution
>John R.W. Stott, <emphasis
>Christ the Controversialist</emphasis
>, InterVarsity Press 1978, s. 97, 104.</attribution>
<para
>The Jews to whom Jesus spoke [...] imagined that to possess Scripture was tantamount to possessing life. Hillel used to say, &quot;He who has gotten to himself words of Torah has gotten to himself the life of the world to come.&quot; Their study was an end in itself. In this they were grievously deceived. [...]</para>
<para
>There is neither merit nor profit in the reading of Scripture for its own sake, but only if it effectively introduces us to Jesus Christ. Whenever the Bible is read, what is needed is an eager expectation that through it we may meet Christ.</para>
</blockquote>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-approaches"
><title
>Lähestyminen Jumalan Sanaan</title>
<para
>Hearing and reading provide a telescopic view of the scripture while study and memorization provide a microscopic view of scripture. Meditating on the scriptures brings hearing, reading, studying and memorization together and cements the word in our minds.</para>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-hear"
><title
>Kuuntele</title>
<para
>Lk.11:28 <quote
>Siunattuja ovat he, ketkä kuulevat Jumalan Sanan, ja seuraavat sitä.</quote
></para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-read"
><title
>Lue</title>
<para
>Rev.1:3 <quote
>Autuas se, joka tämän toisille lukee, autuaat ne, jotka kuulevat nämä ennussanat [...]</quote
></para>
<para
>1 Tim.4:13 <quote
>Lue seurakunnalle pyhiä kirjoituksia [...]</quote
> </para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-study"
><title
>Tutkimus</title>
<para
>Acts 17:11 <quote
>Juutalaiset olivat täällä avarakatseisempia kuin Tessalonikassa. He ottivat sanan halukkaasti vastaan ja tutkivat päivittäin kirjoituksista, pitikö kaikki paikkansa.</quote
> </para>
<para
>2 Tim.2:15 <quote
>Pyri kaikin voimin osoittautumaan Jumalan silmissä luotettavaksi työntekijäksi, joka ei häpeä työtään ja joka opettaa totuuden sanaa oikein.</quote
></para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-memorize"
><title
>Paina mieleen</title>
<para
>Ps.119:11 <quote
>Minä talletan kaikki ohjeesi sydämeeni, etten rikkoisi sinua vastaan.</quote
></para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-meditate"
><title
>Mietiskele</title>
<para
>Ps.1:2-3 <quote
>Vaan löytää ilonsa Herran laista, tutkii sitä päivin ja öin. Hän on kuin puu, vetten äärelle istutettu: se antaa hedelmän ajallaan, eivätkä sen lehdet lakastu. Hän menestyy kaikissa toimissaan.</quote
> </para>

<para
>The Navigators illustrate this by saying that as the thumb can touch all the fingers, we can meditate on the Word as we do any of the first four. Meditation is a key to revelation. A new Christian needs to hear and read the Bible more than they need to study and memorize it. This is so that they become familiar with the overall message of the Bible.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-types"
><title
>Raamatuntutkimisen tyypit</title>
<sect2 id="basics-types-topical"
><title
>Ajankohtainen tutkiminen</title>
<para
>Pick out a certain topic and follow it through, using cross-references or a concordance.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-types-character"
><title
>Character Study</title>
<para
>Raamatun henkilön elämän tutkiminen, esim. Joosefin elämä 1. Moos 37-50.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="basics-types-expository"
><title
>Expository Study</title>
<para
>Yksittäisen Raamatunkohdan tutkiminen, jakeen, luvun tai kirjan tutkiminen.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-interpretation"
><title
>Oikean tulkinnan perusteet</title>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-interpretation-content"
><title
>Sisältö</title>
<para
>Mitä se sanoo? Mitä se sanoo alkuperäiskielellä? Ole tarkka määrittelyissä. Älä lue sitä, mitä se ei sano.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-interpretation-context"
><title
>Asiayhteys</title>
<para
>Mitä jakeet sanovat? &quot;Asiayhteys on tärkein&quot; on sääntö - tekstikohdan tulee olla sopusoinnussa koko tekstin rakenteen ja kirjan kanssa.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-interpretation-cross"
><title
>Ristiinviittaukset</title>
<para
>Mitä muut jakeet sanovat tästä aiheesta muualla Raamatussa? Jumala ei ole itseään vastaan, tulkintamme tulee perustua kirjoitusten vertailulla muihin kirjoituksiin.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-expository"
><title
>An Expository Study of Matthew 6:1-18</title>
<para
>Let's study together Mt.6:1-18. Read it to yourself, first looking for the key verse, the verse that sums up the whole passage. Think you have it? Test it by picking different places in the passage and asking yourself if they relate to the thought of the key verse. Once you find it, write it as Roman numeral One of your outline:</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperroman">
	<listitem
><para
>Beware of practicing your righteousness before men to be noticed</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para
>What does <quote
>practicing your righteousness</quote
> mean? Does the passage give any examples? What area of our lives is being addressed? <emphasis
>Our motives!</emphasis
> What sub-headings develop this thought?</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperalpha">
	<listitem
><para
>Kun annat</para
></listitem>
 	<listitem
><para
>Kun paastoat</para
></listitem>
 	<listitem
><para
>Kun rukoilet</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para
>Now fill in the outline with specific instructions of how to avoid wrong ways of practicing our righteousness:</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperalpha">
  <listitem
><para
>Kun annat <orderedlist numeration="loweralpha">
		<listitem
><para
>don't sound a trumpet. (how might someone <quote
>sound a trumpet</quote
> today?)</para
></listitem>
     		<listitem
><para
>tee se salaisesti.</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>jne.</para
></listitem>
	</orderedlist
></para>
  </listitem>
</orderedlist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-worksheet"
><title
>Worksheet: How to Use a Concordance</title>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-select"
><title
>Löydä erityinen jae</title>
<orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><para
>Ota jakeen avainsana tai epätavallisin sana.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Turn to this word alphabetically.</para
></listitem>
 	<listitem
><para
>Etene listausta alaspäin kunnes löydät jakeesi.</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>
	
<para
>Etsi nämä jakeet: <orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><para
><quote
>Faithful are the wounds of a friend</quote
></para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
><quote
>Olemme Kristuksen lähettiläitä.</quote
></para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Kertomus rikkaasta miehestä ja Lasaruksesta.</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-study"
><title
>To Do a Topical Study </title>
<para
>Let's say you wanted to do a study of the word &quot;redemption.&quot; First you would look up that word in the concordance and look up references listed for it. Then you could look up related words and references listed for them, e.g. &quot;redeem, redeemed, ransom,&quot; even &quot;buy&quot; or &quot;bought.&quot; </para>
</sect2>


<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-clarify"
><title
>Kreikkalaisten ja heprealaisten sanojen merkityksen selvittäminen</title>
<para
>What if you noticed a contradiction in the KJV between Mt.7:1 <quote
>Judge not lest you be judged</quote
> and 1 Cor.2:15 <quote
>He that is spiritual judgeth all things.</quote
> Maybe there are two different Greek words here, both being translated &quot;judge&quot; in English? (We're using Strong's from here out.) </para>
<orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><para
>Katso &quot;tuomio&quot;.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Etene lukua alas jaken  Matt.7:1 kohdalle. Oikealla on luku, 2919. Tämä viittaa käytettyyn kreikkalaiseen sanaan. Kirjoita se ylös.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Now look up &quot;judgeth&quot;.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Go down the column to 1 Cor.2:15 . . . . . 350.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Turn in the back to the Greek dictionary. (Remember, you're in the NT so the language is Greek, while the OT is Hebrew.) Compare the meaning of 2919 with the meaning of 350 and you have your answer! </para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-names"
><title
>Etsi nimien merkityksiä</title>
<para
>Samalla menetelmällä voimme löytää kreikkalaisten ja heprealaisten nimien merkityksiä.</para>
<para
>Katso näitä nimiä ja kirjoita ylös niiden merkitykset:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem
><para
>Nabal</para
></listitem>
<listitem
><para
>Abigail</para
></listitem>
<listitem
><para
>Joosua</para
></listitem>
<listitem
><para
>Barnabas</para
></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect2
> 

</sect1>

</chapter>
