<chapter id="h2-rules"
><title
>Raamatuntulkinnan säännöt (hermeneutiikka)</title>
<para
>We already learned about the "3 Cs": content, context, cross-reference. We want to expand that now by delving briefly into biblical hermeneutics, whose goal is to discover the meaning intended by the original author (and Author!). While many applications of a passage are valid, only one interpretation is valid. The scripture itself says this by saying that no scripture is of any private interpretation (2 Pe.1:20 KJV <quote
>Knowing this first, that no prophesy of scripture is of any private interpretation.</quote
>). Certain rules are helps toward discovering the correct meaning; by ignoring these rules people have brought much trouble on themselves and their followers. 2 Pe.3:16 <quote
>...in which are some things hard to understand, which the untaught and unstable distort, as they do also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction.</quote
></para>

<para
>How do we go about discovering the intended meaning of a passage? Let's say your attention has been drawn to a particular verse whose meaning is not clear to you. How do you study it out? Keep these rules in mind:</para>

<section id="h2-rules-exact"
><title
>Sääntö 1 - Tulkitse sanojen täsmällisten merkitysten mukaan.</title>
<para
>The more precise we can be with the exact, original meaning of the words the better our interpretation will be. Try to find the exact meaning of the key words by following these steps:</para>

<orderedlist>
	<listitem>
		<formalpara
><title
>Määrittely</title>
		<para
>Katso määreitelmää kreikkalaisesta tai heprealaisesta sanakirjasta  Verbeille verbin aikamuoto on myös ratkaiseva.</para>
		</formalpara>
	</listitem>
	
	<listitem>
		<formalpara
><title
>Ristiinviittaukset</title>
		<para
>Compare scripture with scripture. Seeing how the same Greek or Hebrew word (not the English word) is used in scripture may clarify or throw new light on the definition. How does the same author use this word elsewhere? Other authors? Your reference tools may give you uses of the word in non-biblical documents, as well. Why do we have to go to the original languages; why isn't the English word good enough? <emphasis
>Because more than one greek word may be translated into the same english word, and the greek words may have different shades of meaning.</emphasis
></para>
		</formalpara>
	</listitem>
</orderedlist>

<section id="h2-rules-exact-crossref-ex1a"
><title
>Esimerkki 1A</title>
<para
>Jn.20:17 <emphasis
>"Touch me not"</emphasis
> (KJV) sounds harsh, doesn't it? Sounds like Jesus doesn't want to be touched now that He is risen, that He is too holy or something. But that doesn't seem right, so let's look it up in Spiros Zodhiates' <emphasis
>The Complete Word Study New Testament</emphasis
> (AMG Publishers, 1991).</para>

<para
>Definition: Turning to John 20:17, above the word "Touch" we see "pim680." The letters give us a code for the part of speech, and the number refers to Strong's dictionary reference. Let's look up the definition (p. 879). "680. Haptomai; from hapto (681), touch. Refers to such handling of an object as to exert a modifying influence upon it... Distinguished from pselaphao (5584), which actually only means to touch the surface of something. " Now look up "pim." The grammar codes in Zodhiates come right after Revelation; on p. 849 we see that pim stands for "present imperative active (80)". On p.857, "Present Imperative. In the active voice, it may indicate a command to do something in the future which involves continuous or repeated action or, when it is negated, a command to stop doing something. " This is a negative command, so it is to stop doing something that is already occuring. So, what have we found?</para>
<para
><emphasis
>Maria on jo tarttunut Jeesukseen, ja hän pyysi lopettamaan kiinnipitämisen!</emphasis
></para>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-exact-crossref-ex1b"
><title
>Esimerkki 1B</title>
<para
>Jaak. 5:14, <emphasis
>Vanhimmatvoidelkoot hänet öljyllä Herran nimessä ja rukoilkoot hänen puolestaan</emphasis
>. Mitä on tämä voitelu?</para>
<para
>Definition of aleipho (218) - "to oil" (Strong's); but we also have another Greek word translated "anoint", chrio (5548) - "to smear or rub with oil, i.e. to consecrate to an office or religious service" (Strong's). Since it's a verb, consider the tense also, "apta" aorist participle active. "The aorist participle expresses simple action, as opposed to continuous action...When its relaitonship to the main verb is temporal, it usually signifies action prior to that of the main verb." (Zodhiates p.851)</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem
><para
>Ristiviittaukset sanalle aleipho: <orderedlist>
		<listitem
><para
>Matt.6:17 Kun sinä paastoat, voitele hiuksesi</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>Mk.16:1 [naiset] ostivat tuoksuöljyä mennäkseen voitelemaan Hänet.</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>Mk.6:13 Ja he...voitelivat monta sairasta ja paransivat heidät.</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>Lk.7:38 [...] suuteli Hänen jalkojaan ja voiteli ne tuoksuöljyllä</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>Joh.12:3 Maria [...] voiteli Jeesuksen jalat, ja kuivasi ne hiuksillaan</para
></listitem>
	</orderedlist
></para>
</listitem>

<listitem
><para
>Sanan chrio ristiviittaukset: <orderedlist>
		<listitem
><para
>Lk.4:18 <quote
>Herran Henki on minun ylläni, sillä hän on voidelut minut julistamaan [...]</quote
></para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>Acts 4:27 Jeesus, jonka Sinä olit voidellut</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>Apt 10:38 Jumala voiteli Jeesuksen Pyhällä Hengellä ja voimalla</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>2 Cor.1:21 Nyt Hän, kuka.... voitelee meitä, on Jumala</para
></listitem>
	</orderedlist
></para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para
>Mikä ero on sanoilla aleipho ja chrio? Katso jälleen ristiviittausta ja määritelmää, ja selvitä ero: <emphasis
>&quot;aleipho&quot; on öljyn jokapäiväinen käyttö ja &quot;chrio&quot; on hengellinen</emphasis
></para>

<para
>Öljyn jokapäiväisen käytön kuvaus (joskin sanaa ei käytetä) siihen aikaan kun laupias samarialainen huolehti ryöstäjien lyömän miehen hän kaatoi öljyä ja viiniä haavaan. Öljyllä oli siis lääketieteellinen käyttö Jeesuksen päivinä. </para>
<para
>Lisää nyt juurioppimamme tähän Jaak. 5:14 sanantutkimiseen <emphasis
>"Jos joku teistä on sairaana, kutsukoon hän luokseen seurakunnan vanhimmat. Nämä voidelkoot hänet öljyllä Herran nimessä ja rukoilkoot hänen puolestaan Herran nimeen."</emphasis
> Onko "voitelu" hengellistä vai jokapäiväistä? Jokapäiväistä!</para>
<para
>And the tense in Greek, the aorist participle, would be better translated "having anointed," so the order is the anointing first, then the prayer ("in the name of the Lord"refers to the prayer, not the anointing). James 5 is saying that the elders should give the sick person medicine and pray for him in the name of the Lord. Doesn't that express a beautiful balance of practical and spiritual in our God! </para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-context">
<title
>Sääntö 2 - Tulkitse raamatullisia yhteyksiä</title>
<para
>Interpret scripture in harmony with other scripture. What do the verses on each side say? What is the theme of the chapter? the book? Does your interpretation fit with these? If not, it is flawed. Usually, the context supplies what we need to correctly interpret the passage. Context is key. If confusion remains as to the meaning after we have interpreted the text within its context, we have to look further.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-context-ex2a"
><title
>Esimerkki 2A</title>
<para
>Edellisellä tunnilla ajattelimme Joh.3:5 <emphasis
>"syntynyt vedestä ja Hengestä."</emphasis
> Mitä on keskustelussa oleva vesi tässä asiayhteydessään?</para>
<para
>Water baptism is not under discussion here, which would be a big switch from the subject being discussed by Jesus and Nicodemus. Watch out for a sudden change of topic, it may be a clue that your interpretation has been derailed! The water is the amniotic fluid, "born of water" = natural birth.</para>
</section>
<section id="h2-rules-context-ex2b"
><title
>Esimerkki 2B</title>
<para
>1 Kor.14:34 <quote
>Nainen vaietkoon seurakunnassa</quote
> on otettu raamatulliseen yhteyteen 1 Kor.11:5 <quote
>jokainen nainen [...] rukoillessaan tai profetoidessaan [...]</quote
></para>
</section>
<section id="h2-rules-context-ex2c"
><title
>Esimerkki 2C</title>
<para
>Acts 2:38 <quote
>And Peter said to them, &quot;Repent, and let each of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins [...]&quot;</quote
>. Is this teaching baptismal regeneration? If this was the only verse of scripture we had, we would have to conclude that. But in the light of the clear teaching elsewhere that regeneration happens by faith in Christ, we have to interpret it otherwise. Peter is urging baptism as a way for his hearers to respond to the gospel. If baptism were the pathway to being born again, how could Paul write 1 Cor.1:17 <emphasis
>"For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel"</emphasis
>? </para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-hcontest">
<title
>Rule 3 - Tulkitse historiallisia ja kultturellisia yhteyksiä</title>
<para
>At first we are not asking <quote
>What does it mean to me?</quote
> but <quote
>What did it mean to the original readers?</quote
>; later we can ask, <quote
>What does it mean to me?</quote
>. We have to take into account the historical and cultural background of the author and the recipients.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-hcontest-ex3a"
><title
>Esimerkki 3A</title
><para
><quote
>3 päivää &amp; 3 yötä</quote
> (Matt.12:40) on johdattanut muutamia "Keskiviikon ristiinnaulitsemisen teoriaan," erityisesti Armstrongismin kultissa. Kuinka Jeesus kuoli perjantaina iltapäivällä ja nousi ylös sunnuntaiaamuna kuten sanotaan "nousi ylös kolmantena päivänä" (Matt.16:21)? Sanojen "kolme" or "päivää" täsmällinen merkitys ei auta selittämään silmiinpistävää ristiriitaa.</para>
<para
>We need an historical tidbit: Jews counted any part of a day as a full day, as we would count buckets of water (if there were six and one-half buckets of water, we would say there were 7 buckets of water even if one was only partly full). So to the Jewish mind, any part of a day counted as a full day, and days started at 6 p.m. and ended at 6 p.m. Friday from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. = day 1. Friday 6 p.m. to Saturday 6 p.m. = day 2. Saturday 6 p.m. to Sunday 5 or so a.m. = day 3. Interpreting within the cultural context keeps us out of trouble.</para>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-hcontest-ex3b"
><title
>Esimerkki 3B</title
><para
>Gen.15:7-21. The historical context is that cutting animals in two and then walking between the pieces was the normal way of entering a contract in Abraham's day. Both parties walked between, taking the pledge that dismemberment would happen to them if they didn't live up to their part of the contract. But in this case only God goes thru, making it a unilateral covenant.</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-normal"
><title
>Sääntö 4 - Tulkitse kielen sanojen normaalikäytön mukaan</title>
<para
>Antakaamme kirjaimellisen kielen olla kirjaimellista ja kuvaavan kielen olla kuvaavaa. Ja katso sanontoja, joilla on erityinen merkitys.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-normal-ex4a"
><title
>Esimerkki 4A</title>
<para
><quote
>paha silmä</quote
> Mt.6:23.</para>
<para
>Sääntö 1, sanojen "evil" ja "eye" määritelmät - ei opastusta tässä. Sääntö 2, asiayhteys: sekoittaa meitä yhä enemmän. Ei näytä sopivan aiempaan ja jäljempään tekstiin! Tämän pitäisi näyttää meille, että emme ymmärrä oikein!!</para>
<para
>Meillä on tässä heprealainen sanonta, <quote
>evil eye</quote
>. Tarkastellaanpa tämän sanonnan muita merkityksiä: Mt.20:15 "<emphasis
>ja kai minä saan omallani tehdä mitä haluan? Katsotko sinä karsaasti [lit."evil"] sitä, että minä olen hyvä [lit. "jalo"]?</emphasis
>" Huomaamme, että "evil eye" on heprealainen sanonta olla kitsas tai kateellinen. Palaa nyt takaisin  Matteuksen 6. lukuun ja huomaa kuinka tämä ymmärtäminen sitoutuu niin täydellisesti yhteen asiayhteyden kanssa.</para>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-normal-ex4b"
><title
>Esimerkki 4B</title>
<para
>Is.59:1 <quote
>Herran käsi ei ole lyhennetty;</quote
></para>
<para
>5. Moos. 33:27 <quote
>Sinun turvasi on ikiaikojen Jumala, sinua kantavat ikuiset käsivarret. Hän karkotti tieltäsi viholliset ja käski sinun hävittää heidät.</quote
></para>
<para
>Viittaamalla Jumalan ruumiinosiin mormonit todistavat, että Jumala oli kerran mies kuten me. Kun he ovat vakuuttaneet ihmiset siitä, he jatkavat opettamista, että me voimme tulla Jumaliksi juuri kuten Hän on! Hänen antamalla luennolla ryhmä vanhempia mormoneja haastoi Walter Martinin (<emphasis
>Kulttien kuningaskunnan</emphasis
> tekijä) riitaan lukuisalla joukolla samanlaisia jakeita. Tohtori Martin pyysi mormoneja lukemaan yhden tekstin lisää. Ps. 91:4 <quote
>Hän levittää siipensä yllesi, ja sinä olet turvassa niiden alla. Hänen uskollisuutensa on sinulle muuri ja kilpi.</quote
>. W.M. sanoi, <quote
>Samalla tulkinnalla, jolla todistitte Jumalan ihmiseksi, te todistitte, että hän on lintu.</quote
>. Mormonien oli naurettava huomatessaan heidän paikaknsa. </para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-parables"
><title
>Sääntö 5 - Ymmärrä kertomusten tarkoitus ja ero kertomuksen ja allegorian välillä</title>
<para
>Allegoria on: <emphasis
>Kertomus, jossa kullakin osalla on merkitys.</emphasis
></para>
<para
>Jokainen kertomus on allegoria, tosi vai epätosi?</para>

<para
>Some parables are allegories, for instance, the parable of the sower is an allegory: the seed is the word of God, the thorns are worries and greed, etc. But most parables are not allegories but simply stories to illustrate one point. It's dangerous to get our doctrine from parables; they can be twisted to say all sorts of things. We need to get our doctrine from clear scriptures that lay it out; then if a parable illustrates that, fine.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-parables-ex5a"
><title
>Esimerkki 5A</title>
<para
>Kertomus leskestä ja väärämielisestä tuomarista Luuk.18:1-8. Tämä kertomus valaisee yhden läksyn: lannistumaton rukoilu. Jos me sijoitamme sen allegoriaan, mitä meillä on?</para>
<para
>Kaikenlaisia vääryyksiä tapahtuu merkityksille. Jumala on halutun puolustamaan leskiä, rukoilijat "kiusaavat" Häntä, jne.</para
></section>

<section id="h2-rules-parables-ex5b"
><title
>Esimerkki 5B</title>
<para
>Kertomus väärästä huoneenhaltijasta Lk 16:1-9. Mikä on kertomuksen merkitys? Onko se allegoria?  </para>
<para
>Huoneenhaltijaa kunnioitetaan vain yhden asian tähden, hänen viekkautensa valmistautuessaan virasta erottamisen jälkeiseen aikaan. Mutta häntä ei kunnioiteta hänen epäeettisen käytöksen takia mestarinsa petkuttamisesta. </para>
</section>

</section>
</chapter>
