<chapter id="h2-basics"
><title
>Základy studia Bible</title>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-purpose">
<title
>Proč přistupujeme k Bibli</title>
<para>
<blockquote
><attribution
>Jn.5:39-40</attribution
> <para
>You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is these that bear witness of Me; and you are unwilling to come to Me, that you may have life.</para>
</blockquote
> 
</para>

<para
>The chief purpose of the book is to bring us to the Person. Martin Luther said <quote
>we go to the cradle only for the sake of the baby</quote
>; just so in Bible study, we do it not for its own sake but for fellowship with God. </para>

<blockquote
><attribution
>John R.W. Stott, <emphasis
>Christ the Controversialist</emphasis
>, InterVarsity Press 1978, pp.97, 104.</attribution>
<para
>The Jews to whom Jesus spoke [...] imagined that to possess Scripture was tantamount to possessing life. Hillel used to say, &quot;He who has gotten to himself words of Torah has gotten to himself the life of the world to come.&quot; Their study was an end in itself. In this they were grievously deceived. [...]</para>
<para
>V samotném čtení Písma není žádná zásluha ani zisk, pokud nás nepřivede k Ježíši Kristu. Při každém čtení Bible je potřeba horlivě očekávat, že se takto můžeme setkat s Ježíšem.</para>
</blockquote>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-approaches"
><title
>Přístupy k Božímu Slovu</title>
<para
>Slyšení a čtení poskytuje všeobecný a celkový pohled na Písmo, zatímco studium a učení (memorování) nabízí pohled detailní. Meditace nad Písmem spojuje slyšení, čtení, studium a učení se a pomáhá uchovat slovo v naší mysli.</para>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-hear"
><title
>Slyšení</title>
<para
>Lk.11:28 <quote
>blessed are those who hear the word of God, and observe it.</quote
></para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-read"
><title
>Čtení</title>
<para
>Rev.1:3 <quote
>Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of this prophecy [...]</quote
></para>
<para
>1 Tim.4:13 <quote
>give attention to the public reading of Scripture [...]</quote
> </para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-study"
><title
>Scripture quotes are from the New American Standard Bible unless otherwise indicated</title>
<para
>Acts 17:11 <quote
>Now these were more noble-minded than those in Thessalonica, for they received the word with great eagerness, examining the Scriptures daily, to see whether these things were so.</quote
> </para>
<para
>2 Tim.2:15 <quote
>Be diligent [KJV `Study'] to present yourself approved to God as a workman who does not need to be ashamed, handling accurately the word of truth.</quote
></para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-memorize"
><title
>Memorování</title>
<para
>Ps.119:11 <quote
>Thy word I have hid in my heart, that I may not sin against Thee.</quote
></para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-approaches-meditate"
><title
>Meditování</title>
<para
>Ps.1:2-3 <quote
>But his delight is in the law of the Lord, And in His law he meditates day and night. And he will be like a tree firmly planted by streams of water, Which yields its fruit in its season, And its leaf does not wither; And in whatever he does, he prospers.</quote
> </para>

<para
>Navigátoři (?, v originále "The Navigators") to vysvětlují tak, že stejně jako palec, který se může dotknout každého prstu, můžeme meditovat nad Slovem každým z těch čtyřech způsobů. Meditace je klíčem ke zjevení. Nový křesťan potřebuje Bibli víc slyšet a číst, než studovat a učit se. Potřebuje se totiž seznámit s celkovým poselstvím Bible.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-types"
><title
>Typy studia Bible</title>
<sect2 id="basics-types-topical"
><title
>Tématické studium</title>
<para
>Zvolí se určité téma a procházejí se místa, která o tématu mluví. Využívají se přitom křížové odkazy a konkordance.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-types-character"
><title
>Studium postavy</title>
<para
>Studium života biblické postavy, např. Josefa v Gn 37-50.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="basics-types-expository"
><title
>Vysvětlující studium</title>
<para
>Studium určité pasáže: odstavce, kapitoly nebo knihy.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-interpretation"
><title
>Základy správného výkladu</title>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-interpretation-content"
><title
>Obsah</title>
<para
>Co text říká? Co text říká v originálním jazyce? Dávejte si pozor na definice. Nesnažte se "číst" něco, co text neříká.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-interpretation-context"
><title
>Souvislosti</title>
<para
>What do the verses around it say? &quot;Context is king&quot; is the rule -- the passage must make sense within the structure of the entire passage and book.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-interpretation-cross"
><title
>Odkazy</title>
<para
>Co říkají ostatní verše k tomuto tématu v celé Bibli? Bůh nepopře sám sebe, proto naše interpretace musí obstát vzhledem ke zbytku Písma.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-expository"
><title
>Vysvětlující studium Matouše 6,1-18</title>
<para
>Prostudujme si společně Matouše 6,1-18. Přečtěte si tu pasáž a vyhledejte klíčový verš, verš, který vystihuje celou pasáž. Pokud si myslíte, že jej máte, přezkoušejte jej tak, že si vyberete různé části z celé pasáže a ujistíte se, že mají vztah k významu klíčového verše. Až jej najdete, napište si jej jako římskou jedničku do vaší osnovy:</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperroman">
	<listitem
><para
>Beware of practicing your righteousness before men to be noticed</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para
>What does <quote
>practicing your righteousness</quote
> mean? Does the passage give any examples? What area of our lives is being addressed? <emphasis
>Our motives!</emphasis
> What sub-headings develop this thought?</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperalpha">
	<listitem
><para
>When you give</para
></listitem>
 	<listitem
><para
>When you fast</para
></listitem>
 	<listitem
><para
>When you pray</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para
>A teď doplňte osnovu o konkrétní instrukce, jak se vyhnout špatným způsobům praktikování spravedlnosti:</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperalpha">
  <listitem
><para
>When you give <orderedlist numeration="loweralpha">
		<listitem
><para
>don't sound a trumpet. (how might someone <quote
>sound a trumpet</quote
> today?)</para
></listitem>
     		<listitem
><para
>do it secretly.</para
></listitem>
		<listitem
><para
>etc.</para
></listitem>
	</orderedlist
></para>
  </listitem>
</orderedlist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="h2-basics-worksheet"
><title
>Jak používat konkordanci</title>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-select"
><title
>K nalezení konkrétního verše</title>
<orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><para
>Vyberte z verše klíčové slovo nebo slovo nejméně běžné.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Vyhledejte v konkordanci toto slovo (v základním tvaru).</para
></listitem>
 	<listitem
><para
>Projděte seznam výskytů, dokud nenaleznete váš verš.</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>
	
<para
>Find these verses: <orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><para
><quote
>Faithful are the wounds of a friend</quote
></para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
><quote
>We are ambassadors of Christ.</quote
></para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>The story of the rich man and Lazarus.</para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-study"
><title
>K tématickému studiu </title>
<para
>Let's say you wanted to do a study of the word &quot;redemption.&quot; First you would look up that word in the concordance and look up references listed for it. Then you could look up related words and references listed for them, e.g. &quot;redeem, redeemed, ransom,&quot; even &quot;buy&quot; or &quot;bought.&quot; </para>
</sect2>


<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-clarify"
><title
>K ujasnění slovního významu v řečtině a hebrejštině</title>
<para
>What if you noticed a contradiction in the KJV between Mt.7:1 <quote
>Judge not lest you be judged</quote
> and 1 Cor.2:15 <quote
>He that is spiritual judgeth all things.</quote
> Maybe there are two different Greek words here, both being translated &quot;judge&quot; in English? (We're using Strong's from here out.) </para>
<orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><para
>Look up &quot;judge&quot;.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Vyhledejte odkaz na Mt 7,1. Vpravo naleznete číslo 2919. To je odkaz na použité řecké slovo. Poznamenejte si ho.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Now look up &quot;judgeth&quot;.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>U odkazu na 1K 2,15 je číslo 350.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Otevřete část s řeckým slovníkem. (Jsme v Novém Zákoně, proto řečtina. Pro Starý Zákon používáme hebrejštinu.) Porovnáním významu slova číslo 2919 se slovem číslo 350 získáte odpověď. </para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="h2-basics-worksheet-names"
><title
>K nalezení významu jmen</title>
<para
>Stejným způsobem můžete zjistit význam jmen v řečtině nebo hebrejštině.</para>
<para
>Nalezněte tato jména a zjistěte jejich význam:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem
><para
>Nábal</para
></listitem>
<listitem
><para
>Abigail</para
></listitem>
<listitem
><para
>Jozue</para
></listitem>
<listitem
><para
>Barnabáš</para
></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect2
> 

</sect1>

</chapter>
