<chapter id="hdbk-intro"
><title
>Johdanto</title>

<sect1 id="hdbk-intro-about"
><title
>Tietoja BibleTimestä</title>
	<para
>&bibletime; is a powerful Bible study tool written for the &kde; environment on the Linux operating system. It is based on the <ulink url="http://www.crosswire.org/sword"
>Sword</ulink
> library, which provides the back-end functionality for &bibletime;, such as viewing Bible text, searching etc. Sword is the flagship product of the <ulink url="http://www.crosswire.org"
>Crosswire Bible Society</ulink
>. </para>
	
	<para
>&bibletime; is designed to be used with works encoded in one of the formats supported by the Sword project. Complete information on the supported document formats can be found in the <ulink url="http://www.crosswire.org/sword/develop/index.jsp"
> developers section</ulink
> of the Sword Project, Crosswire Bible Society.</para>
	
<sect2 id="hdbk-intro-works"
><title
>Saatavana olevat tehtävät</title>

	<para
>Yli 200 asiakirjaa 50 kielellä ovat saatavana <ulink url="http://www.crosswire.org"
>Crosswire Bible Societyn</ulink
> sivuilta. Nämä sisältävät: <variablelist>
		<varlistentry>
		<term
>Raamattuja</term>
		<listitem>
		<para
>The full Bible text, with optional things like Strong's Numbers, headings and/or footnotes in the text. Bibles are available in many languages, and include not only modern versions, but also ancient texts like the Codex Leningradensis ("WLC", Hebrew), and the Septuagint ("LXX", Greek). This is the most advanced section in the library of the Sword project. </para>
		</listitem
></varlistentry>
	
		<varlistentry>
		<term
>Kirjat</term>
		<listitem>
		<para
>Books available include &quot;Imitation of Christ&quot;, &quot;Enuma Elish&quot;, and &quot;Josephus: The Complete Works&quot; </para>
		</listitem>
		</varlistentry>
			
		<varlistentry>
		<term
>Kommentaareja</term>
		<listitem>
		<para
>Commentaries available include classics like John Wesley's "Notes on the Bible", Matthew Henry`s commentary and Luther's "Commentary on Galatians." With the <emphasis
>Personal</emphasis
> commentary you can <link linkend="hdbk-op-parts-desk-write"
>record your own personal notes</link
> to sections of the Bible. </para
> 
		</listitem>
		</varlistentry>
			
		<varlistentry>
		<term
>Daily devotionals</term>
		<listitem>
		<para
>Many people appreciate these daily portions from God's word. Available works include Daily Light on the Daily Path, and the Losungen. </para>
		</listitem>
		</varlistentry>
	
		<varlistentry>
		<term
>Lexicons/Dictionaries</term>
		<listitem>
		<para
>Lexicons available include: Robinson's Morphological Analysis Codes, Brown-Driver-Briggs Hebrew Lexicon and the International Standard Bible Encyclopedia. Dictionaries available include Strong's Hebrew Bible Dictionary, Strong's Greek Bible Dictionary, Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language 1913, Nave's Topical Bible. </para>
		</listitem>
		</varlistentry>
	</variablelist>

	</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="hdbk-intro-motivation"
><title
>Motivaatiota</title>
	<para
>Päämäärämme on palvella Jumalaa ja teemme osamme auttaaksemme muita Jumala-suhteen kasvussa. Yritämme päästä siihen tehokkaalla, laadukkaalla ohjelmalla, ja vielä tehdä siitä yksinkertainen ja opastava käytössä. Meidän päämäärämme on, että Jumalaa ylistettäisiin, sillä hän on kaikkien hyvien asioiden lähde. </para>
	<blockquote
><attribution
>James 1:17, NASB</attribution>
	<para
>Every good thing given and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shifting shadow.</para>
	</blockquote>
	<para
>Jumala siunatkoon sinua käyttäessäsi tätä ohjelmaa. </para>
</sect2>

</sect1>

</chapter>
